.\" Man page for zsoelim
.\"
.\" Copyright (C), 1994, 1995, Graeme W. Wilford. (Wilf.)
.\"
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License as specified in the file COPYING that comes with the
.\" man-db distribution.
.\"
.\" Sat Dec 10 19:33:32 GMT 1994  Wilf. (G.Wilford@ee.surrey.ac.uk) 
.\" 
.pc
.TH ZSOELIM 1 "2018-04-05" "2.8.3" "Manual pager utils"
.SH NAME
zsoelim \- satisfy .so requests in roff input
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zsoelim 
.RB [\| \-CVh \|]
.RI [\| file
\&.\|.\|.\|]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B zsoelim 
parses 
.I file
arguments, or if none are specified, its standard input for lines of the
form:

.B .so  
.RI <\| filename \|>

These requests are replaced by the contents of the 
.I filename
specified.
If the request cannot be met,
.B zsoelim
looks for 
.I filename.ext
where
.I .ext
can be one of 
.BR .gz ,
.BR .Z
or
.BR .z .
Other extension types may be supported depending upon compile time options.
If the request can be met by a compressed file, this file is decompressed
using an appropriate decompressor and its output is used to satisfy
the request.

Traditionally,
.B soelim 
programs were used to allow roff preprocessors to be able to preprocess the 
files referred to by the requests.
This particular version was written to circumvent problems created by
support for compressed manual pages.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-compatible
This flag is available for compatibility with other 
.B soelim
programs.
Its use is to enable .so requests followed by something other than 
whitespace.
As this is already the default behaviour, it is ignored.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Display version information.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR groff (1),
.BR man (1),
.BR nroff (1),
.BR troff (1)
.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Wilf. (G.Wilford@ee.surrey.ac.uk).
Fabrizio Polacco (fpolacco@debian.org).
Colin Watson (cjwatson@debian.org).
.fi
