.\" Man page for manconv
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007, 2008 Colin Watson <cjwatson@debian.org>
.\"
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License as specified in the file COPYING that comes with the
.\" man-db distribution.
.pc
.TH MANCONV 1 "2015-11-06" "2.7.5" "Manual pager utils"
.SH NAME
manconv \- convert manual page from one encoding to another
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B manconv
.B \-f
.IR from-code \|[: from-code \|.\|.\|.]
.B \-t
.I to-code
.RB [\| \-dqhV \|]
.RI [\| filename \|]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B manconv
converts a manual page from one encoding to another, like
.BR iconv .
Unlike
.BR iconv ,
it can try multiple possible input encodings in sequence.
This is useful for manual pages installed in directories without an explicit
encoding declaration, since they may be in UTF\-8 or in a legacy character
set.
.PP
If an encoding declaration is found on the first line of the manual page,
that declaration overrides any input encodings specified on
.BR manconv 's
command line.
Encoding declarations have the following form:
.PP
.RS
.nf
\&\(aq\e" \-*\- coding: UTF\-8 \-*\-
.fi
.RE
.PP
or (if manual page preprocessors are also to be declared):
.PP
.RS
.nf
\&\(aq\e" t \-*\- coding: ISO\-8859\-1 \-*\-
.fi
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-f\fP \fIencodings\fP, \fB\-\-from\-code\fP \fIencodings\fP
Try each of
.I encodings
(a colon-separated list) in sequence as the input encoding.
.TP
\fB\-t\fP \fIencoding\fP, \fB\-\-to\-code\fP \fIencoding\fP
Convert the manual page to
.IR encoding .
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Do not issue error messages when the page cannot be converted.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-debug
Print debugging information.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Display version information.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR iconv (1),
.IR man (1)
.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Colin Watson (cjwatson@debian.org).
.fi
